**Unit 2: Examining The Common Core State Standards** <span
id="2"></span> 
*In this unit you will explore the Common Core State Standards for
ELA/Literacy and Mathematics in greater detail.  Then, you will
summarize the key points and main themes of the standards for each
subject area.*

**Unit 2 Time Advisory**  
This unit should take you approximately 1 hour and 45 minutes to
complete.  Subunit time estimates may differ depending on your area of
specialty.  For example, high school mathematics educators should review
the specific standards and course progressions for high school
mathematics in greater detail and the standards for ELA/Literacy in less
detail.     
    
 <span
style="color: rgb(85, 85, 85); font-family: 'Myriad Pro', 'Gill Sans', 'Gill Sans MT', Calibri, sans-serif; font-size: 16px; line-height: 24px; -webkit-text-size-adjust: none; ">☐
   </span>Subunit 2.1: 5 minutes  
  
 <span
style="color: rgb(85, 85, 85); font-family: 'Myriad Pro', 'Gill Sans', 'Gill Sans MT', Calibri, sans-serif; font-size: 16px; line-height: 24px; -webkit-text-size-adjust: none; ">☐
   </span>Subunit 2.2: 40 minutes  
  
 <span
style="color: rgb(85, 85, 85); font-family: 'Myriad Pro', 'Gill Sans', 'Gill Sans MT', Calibri, sans-serif; font-size: 16px; line-height: 24px; -webkit-text-size-adjust: none; ">☐
   </span>Subunit 2.3: 60 minutes

**Unit2 Learning Outcomes**  
Upon successful completion of this unit, the student will be able to:  
-   Provide examples of Common Core State Standards for the course that
    the educational consultant is developing.
-   Explain the focus and key takeaways of the Common Core State
    Standards for the educational consultant’s content area.

**2.1 Examining the Common Core State Standards in Greater Detail**
<span id="2.1"></span> 
The Common Core State Standards map out the necessary skills and
concepts that should be learned in each grade in order to lead a student
toward college and career readiness.  Key “anchor standards” offer clear
areas of focus based on college and career readiness.  These anchor
standards then are broken down into detailed and specific learning
outcomes for each grade level and subject area.  Rather than dictate
specific texts that must be covered, the standards generally focus on
specific knowledge and skills that should be developed.  For example,
one of the key ELA/Literacy standards for students in grades 9 and 10 is
to “determine a theme or central idea of a text and analyze in detail
its development over the course of the text, including how it emerges
and is shaped and refined by specific details; provide an objective
summary of the text.”[[1]](#_ftn1)  The ELA/Literacy standards also
provide a model to determine text complexity to ensure that the texts
students are using are appropriately rigorous.  In Mathematics, the
focus of the standards is on the coherence of overall mathematical
practices.  Standards are broken down as specifically as possible – for
example, one Mathematics standard states that students should be able to
“graph linear and quadratic functions and show intercepts, maxima, and
minima”[[2]](#_ftn2) – while also emphasizing the integration of
overarching mathematical principles, such as how to “make sense of
problems and persevere in solving them.”[[3]](#_ftn3)  

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_ftnref1)National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
and Council of Chief State School Officers, “Common Core State Standards
for Language Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, &
Technical Subjects,” National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers, Washington D.C.
(2010): 9-10:2, accessed September 21, 2012,
<http://www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy/RL/9-10/2>.

[[2]](#_ftnref2)National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
and Council of Chief State School Officers, “Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics,” National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers, Washington D.C.
(2010): HSF.IF.C.7A, accessed September 21, 2012,
<http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Content/HSF/IF/C/7/a>.

[[3]](#_ftnref3) National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices and Council of Chief State School Officers, “Common Core State
Standards for Mathematics,” National Governors Association Center for
Best Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers, Washington D.C.
(2010): MP1, accessed September 21, 2012,
<http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Practice>.

**2.2 ELA/Literacy Standards and Key Themes** <span id="2.2"></span> 
The standards for ELA/Literacy include an emphasis on literacy in the
subjects of English Language Arts as well as history, social studies,
science, and technical subjects – thus stressing literacy across the
K-12 curriculum and teaching students to read and analyze non-fiction
texts as well as works of fiction.  More specifically, the ELA/Literacy
standards focus on the areas of reading, writing, speaking, listening,
and language (meaning grammar, usage, and style), with a particular
emphasis on building vocabulary and media literacy in these areas. 
Overall, the ELA/Literacy standards are designed to build in complexity
and difficulty as a student progresses through each grade level.

-   **Reading: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s “Key Points in
    English Language Arts”**
    Link: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s [“Key Points in
    English Language
    Arts”](http://www.corestandards.org/about-the-standards/key-points-in-english-language-arts) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above and read the webpage
    in its entirety.  
        
     This reading should take you approximately 5 minutes to complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s “Common Core
    State Standards for English Language Arts & Literacy in
    History/Social Studies, Science, & Technical Subjects”**
    Link: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s [“Common Core State
    Standards for English Language Arts & Literacy in History/Social
    Studies, Science, & Technical
    Subjects”](http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_ELA%20Standards.pdf) (PDF)  
      
     Instructions: Please click on the link above scroll down the page
    to access and download the PDF.  Review the ELA/Literacy standards
    outlined in this comprehensive PDF.  Pay particular attention to the
    sections titled “Key Design Considerations” on pages 4-5, “What is
    Not Covered by the Standards” on page 6, “Students Who are College
    and Career Ready in Reading, Writing, Speaking, Listening, and
    Language” on page 7, and “How to Read This Document” on page 8. 
    Also be sure to review the section/s dealing with your assigned
    grade level; the sections regarding the standards for grades 6-12
    begin on page 34.  If you are an English Language Arts educator,
    please also review the standards immediately below and above your
    assigned grade level/s.  
        
     This reading should take you approximately 30 minutes to
    complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Lecture: The Hunt Institute’s “The English Language Arts
    Standards: Key Changes and their Evidence”**
    Link: The Hunt Institute’s [“The English Language Arts Standards:
    Key Changes and their
    Evidence”](http://www.hunt-institute.org/knowledge-library/articles/2011-9-1/the-english-language-arts-standards-key-changes-and-their-evidence/) (Adobe
    Flash)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above to access the Hunt
    Institute’s video on the ELA/Literacy standards.  Please watch the
    lecture in its entirety (6:23).  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

**2.3 Mathematics Standards and Key Themes** <span id="2.3"></span> 
For high school students, the Common Core Mathematics standards are
organized by conceptual categories.  These categories are: Number and
Quantity, Algebra, Functions, Modeling, Geometry, and Statistics and
Probability.  The Mathematics standards provide an overview and key
concepts for each of these categories before drilling down into specific
skills that should be learned in each category.  In addition, the
Mathematics standards incorporate eight key practices for approaching
Mathematics that are emphasized throughout all K-12 mathematics courses.
 Known as the “Standards for Mathematical Practice,” these key practices
are[[1]](#_ftn1):  
  
 1. Make sense of problems and persevere in solving them.  
 2. Reason abstractly and quantitatively.  
 3. Construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others.  
 4. Model with mathematics.  
 5. Use appropriate tools strategically.  
 6. Attend to precision.  
 7. Look for and make use of structure.  
 8. Look for and express regularity in repeated reasoning.  

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[1]](#_ftnref1)National Governors Association Center for Best Practices
and Council of Chief State School Officers, “Common Core State Standards
for Mathematics,” National Governors Association Center for Best
Practices, Council of Chief State School Officers, Washington D.C.
(2010), accessed September 21, 2012,
<http://www.corestandards.org/Math/Practice>.

-   **Reading: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s “Key Points in
    Mathematics”**
    Link: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s [“Key Points in
    Mathematics”](http://www.corestandards.org/about-the-standards/key-points-in-mathematics) (HTML)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above and read the webpage
    in its entirety.  
        
     This reading should take you approximately 5 minutes to complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s “Common Core
    State Standards for Mathematics”**
    Link: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s [“Common Core State
    Standards for
    Mathematics”](http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_Math%20Standards.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above and scroll down the
    page to access and download the PDF.  Review the Mathematics
    standards outlined in this comprehensive PDF.  Pay particular
    attention to the sections titled “Introduction” on pages 3-5 and
    “Mathematics: Standards for Mathematical Practice” on pages 6-8.  If
    you are working on the K-8 curriculum, read the sections relating to
    your assigned grade level/s and those immediately below and above
    your assigned grade level/s, found between pages 9-56.  If you are
    working on high school curriculum, review all of the content areas
    beginning on page 57.  
        
     This reading should take you approximately 30 minutes to
    complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Reading: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s “Mathematics
    Appendix A: Designing High School Mathematics Courses Based on the
    Common Core State Standards”**
    Link: Common Core State Standards Initiative’s [“Mathematics
    Appendix A: Designing High School Mathematics Courses Based on the
    Common Core State
    Standards”](http://www.corestandards.org/assets/CCSSI_Mathematics_Appendix_A.pdf) (PDF)  
        
     Instructions: If you are working on the high school curriculum,
    click on the link above and scroll down the page to access and
    download the PDF.  Read pages 1-14 for an overview of how the Common
    Core Mathematics concept areas of Number and Quantity, Algebra,
    Functions, Modeling, Geometry, and Statistics and Probability can be
    integrated into a traditional high school mathematics course
    progression (such as Algebra I, Geometry, Algebra II, etc.).  
        
     This reading should take you approximately 15 minutes to
    complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.

-   **Lecture: The Hunt Institute’s “The Mathematics Standards: Key
    Changes and Their Evidence”**
    Link: The Hunt Institute’s [“The Mathematics Standards: Key Changes
    and Their
    Evidence”](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BNP5MdDDFPY&list=UUF0pa3nE3aZAfBMT8pqM5PA&index=16&feature=plcp)
    (YouTube)  
        
     Instructions: Please click on the link above and watch the lecture
    (4:38) in its entirety.  
        
     This lecture should take you approximately 5 minutes to complete.  
        
     Terms of Use: Please respect the copyright and terms of use
    displayed on the webpage above.


